Compliation of various analysis task writeups - using ECLS K 2011 dataset 


(see coresponding code 1)

Addressing the associations between gender; and certian child demographics as well as spring time literacy and math scores with a future connection made
to spring approaches to learning :

On average, our findings indicate that girls scored slightly higher on the spring literacy assessment (ES = 0.158; p < 0.001). 
When we examine the approaches to learning, our results reveal on average, girls also tend to exhibit moderately more positive behaviors in the spring (ES = 0.488; p < 0.001).
Our results show that in the springtime, male kindergarteners are moderately taller on average by about half an inch and approximately six months older (p < 0.001). 
However, it's important to note we did not find any significant gender differences in spring math scores or in the number of siblings children have (p > 0.05).

(see corresponding code 2)

Addressing the associtations between SES and certian child social and academic demographics :

As indicated in Table 1, we found a relationship between poverty status and spring card sort scores, with kindergarteners in the medium quintile of SES scoring higher 
than low SES (ES=0.25) – yet a lower score than high SES (ES= 0.26; p<.001). There was a slight difference between medium status and medium-high, with medium-high placing
higher (ES= 0.15; p<.01). There were comparable results between medium and medium-low status (p>.05). Our results continued to show a relationship between SES and other 
variables, with SES defining a role within spring number reversals. Moderate SES status kindergarteners scored on average higher than low (ES = 0.52) and medium-low status
SES children (ES = 0.2; p<.001). However, medium-high and high SES children scored higher than medium (ES=0.21; ES=0.38; p<.001) respectively. The number of books parents 
reported having at home for children was similarly affected by SES status; with medium SES children having on average 45 more books than low, and 20 more than medium-low – medium 
SES trended towards having fewer books than medium-high and high; with medium-high reporting 27 more, and high with an additional 47 books (p<.001). We continued to see a 
relationship between SES and other factors including a relationship with fall BMI. Moderate SES children scored lower than medium-high and high (ES =0.14; ES=0.27; p<.001), as well as
lower than low-status children (ES= 0.13; p<.001). Lastly, we found no relationship between children’s spring age and poverty status (p>.05).

(see corresponding code 3)

An investigation into associations between children's level of kindergarten involvement and their subsequent math skill 
achievement :

As seen in Table 1, model 1 suggests that on average and on an adjusted basis, children who
attend a full day of kindergarten exhibit a greater improvement in math skills compared to their
half-day peers (ES = 0.88, p<.001). Model 1, including the baseline score, explains roughly 67%
of the variability in math skill development (p<.001). Model 2 continues to address math skill
growth while also accounting for additional student characteristics. Our results suggest that
social class is positively associated with math skill development during kindergarten (p<.001).
Specifically, on average we see a one-standard deviation increase in social class associated with
a 0.07 standard deviation increase in math skills. We also find that holding all else equal,
students whose primary home language is not English is positively associated with a 0.06
standard deviation increase in math skill development compared to their English-speaking peers
(p<.001). Conversely, on an adjusted basis, we find that on average, students with IEPs have a
-0.15 standard deviation decrease in math skill development compared to their peers without
disabilities (p<.001). Continuing to hold all other covariants constant, our model suggested a
positive association between children’s age and math skill development (p<.01), showing that on
average a one-month increase in age is associated with a 0.004 standard deviation increase in
math learning. We saw no differences in math scores between boys and girls (p >.05). Overall,
including the baseline math scores, our model explains roughly 67% of the variability in math
skill development (p<.001).

